---
layout: post

title: Win percentages by division in NFL
description: Breaking down which divisions have been the most successful in NFL history. 

author: Tolly Taylor
email: ttaylor0416@gmail.com
twitter: TollyTaylor
---

## Win percentage by division in NFL

To better analyze my data set on NFL teams, I broke them into divisions: The AFC West, East, South, North, and the NFC West, East, South and North. From there, I looked at the cumulative records for each division, focusing on average, median and sum. 

The biggest variable in comparing the divisions was the year each team was founded—the Chicago Bears were founded in 1920, while the NFL’s youngest team, Houston Texans, had their first season in 2002. Obviously, this disparity in start date greatly affected the sum of wins for each division, but what was interesting is that there was also a correlation between the divisions that had a low win total—ostensibly because their teams haven’t been in the league very long compared to other division—and teams with a low win average. This might mean that divisions with teams that were started more recently have a tough time winning right away. This would support the popular theory that longevity of coaching and stability of front offices in the NFL leads to more victories in the long term. 

Another interesting comparison to make was looking at averages v. medians. For some divisions, the median win percentage changed by as little as .001, but for the NFC West, the median jumped to .50 from .495. Take away the Arizona Cardinals, who have the second lowest win percentage at .425 of any franchise in the league—despite being tied for the oldest—and the average skyrockets for the division. 

It makes sense that the NFC North, the division with three of the oldest franchises in the NFL, has the most cumulative wins. But I didn’t expect a division like the AFC West, which doesn’t have a team that started before 1960, to be trailing the NFC West by fewer than 200 wins, despite the fact that three teams in the NFC West started in 1946 or earlier. It makes more sense when you look at the division win averages though. The NFC West’s is .495, while the AFC West’s is considerably higher at .522. Overall, the AFC West has the third highest average win percentage, behind only the NFC North and East. 

Half of the eight divisions saw improved win percentages when comparing average wins to median wins, which isn’t interesting by itself. But I did note that three of the four oldest divisions, cumulatively, saw jumps from average to median, meaning three of the four newest divisions saw decreases from average to median win percentages. 

A deeper dive into the numbers could be interesting, since I have the feeling that a small number of unsuccessful teams are disproportionately lowering the win totals for their divisions. 

Here’s the link to my google spreadsheet: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1HdUdJnPPLQWIkVdCKeQT0X4HG8mVgKafU-J4qrH_6BE/edit#gid=925609197 
<iframe width="600" height="371" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1HdUdJnPPLQWIkVdCKeQT0X4HG8mVgKafU-J4qrH_6BE/pubchart?oid=645536693&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>






